1. What data types do each of these values represent?

"A Clockwork Orange" - string
42 - integer
09/02/1945 - date
98.7 - float
$15.99 - currency

2. Explain when a database would be used. Explain when a text file would be used.

Use a database when you concurrent connections or any sort of data manipulation.

Use a text file if only to represent data, not to manage data.

3. Describe one difference between SQL and other programming languages.

SQL is a query language with a single purpose, to define queries that gets, creates and edits data in a database.

Other programming languages have much wider scopes in the functions it will run.

4. In your own words, explain how the pieces of a database system fit together at a high level.

At the highest level you have your SQL database, which consists of a number of uniquely named tables that is used to sort and structure your data. For my example I will use my address book. I will have two tables, contacts and groups.

Each table consists of columns which idenitifies the purpose of the data it will contain, for example my contacts table has columns called date_created, contact_id, name, birthday, phone and email. My groups table has columns group_id, group_name and contact_id. 

The data is then enters into the table which organized by rows, in other words each row will be an individual record of a contact that I have, with the cells containint the data as it relates to the column name. 

To make the 2 tables work together we have shared columns that relate to each other, in this example it is contact_id. By having this in both tables, we can add my contacts into groups simply by adding the contact_id to the groups table, without having to repeat all the individual data from the contacts table.

5. Explain the meaning of table, row, column, and value.

(see question 4)

6. List three data types that can be used in a table.

string, integer, date, 

7. Given this payments table, provide an English description of the following queries and include their results:

 SELECT date, amount
     FROM payments;

     SELECT amount
     FROM payments
     WHERE amount > 500;

     SELECT *
     FROM payments
     WHERE payee = 'Mega Foods';

Select the columns date and amount from the payments table - will return all the rows that contains dates and amounts
Select the amounts from the payments table where the amount is greater than 500 - will return all the rows that where amount vales are greater than 500, but will not return values equal to or less than 500
Select all the columns from the payments table where we pay the company "Mega Foods" - this will return all rows and all columns where the column payee's value is "Mega Foods"

8. Given this users table, write SQL queries using the following criteria and include the output:

The email and sign-up date for the user named DeAndre Data.
The user ID for the user with email 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu'.
All the columns for the user ID equal to 4.

SELECT email, sign_up_date 
    FROM users
    WHERE name = "DeAndre Data";

SELECT user_id 
    FROM users
    WHERE email = 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu';

SELECT *
    FROM users
    WHERE user_id = 4;
